[GEP-31] Add usage doc for in-place update (#12005)
gardener/gardener: docs/usage/shoot-operations/shoot_updates.md

Generally, an upgrade is also performed through a reconciliation of the `Shoot` resource, i.e., the same concepts as for [shoot updates](#updates) apply.
If an end-user triggers an upgrade (e.g., by changing the Kubernetes version) after a new Gardener version was deployed but before the shoot was reconciled again, then this upgrade might incorporate the changes delivered with this new Gardener version.

The `UpdateStrategy` field in the Shoot specification (`.spec.provider.workers[].updateStrategy`) gives users the flexibility to define how the `machine-controller-manager`(MCM) handles worker pool updates during the upgrade process. Currently gardener support three update strategies:
* `AutoRollingUpdate`
* `AutoInPlaceUpdate`
* `ManualInPlaceUpdate`

### In-Place vs. Rolling Updates

> #### In-Place Updates

Reviewer: newline after headers
```suggestion
#### In-Place Updates

```

> #### In-Place Updates

Reviewer 2: This heading is repeated again later, can we improve this?

- The upgrade is performed in a "rolling update" manner, without replacing the underlying machines.

> - The shoot worker nodes remain intact and are not recreated.

Reviewer 2: Not true if `MaxSurge` is configured

- The existing workload is gracefully drained and evicted from the worker nodes, respecting the configured `PodDisruptionBudget`s (see [Specifying a Disruption Budget for your Application](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/configure-pdb/)).
- **No Draining Scenarios**:

>   - When the Kubernetes patch version is updated, the upgrade is executed without draining the node. The shoot worker nodes remain unchanged, and only the `kubelet` process is restarted with the updated Kubernetes version binary.

Reviewer 2: This is also the case for Rolling update strategies, putting it under this heading might be confusing

### AutoRollingUpdate

When the auto rolling update strategy is selected, the upgrade is performed in a "rolling update" manner. The machine-controller-manager sequentially terminates the worker nodes and replaces them with new nodes. This is the default update strategy. To create workers with `AutoRollingUpdate`, either omit the `workers.updateStrategy` field (it will default to `AutoRollingUpdate`) or explicitly set the field to `AutoRollingUpdate` for each worker.

```yaml
spec:
  provider:
    workers:
      - name: cpu-worker
        maxSurge: 0
        maxUnavailable: 2
        updateStrategy: AutoRollingUpdate
```

#### Customize Rolling Update Behaviour of Shoot Worker Nodes

The `.spec.provider.workers[]` list exposes two fields that you might configure based on your workload's needs: `maxSurge` and `maxUnavailable`.
The same concepts [like in Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/#rolling-update-deployment) apply.

> Additionally, you might customize how the MCM is behaving. You can configure the following fields in `.spec.provider.worker[].machineControllerManager`:

Reviewer 2: Nit: You could call it `machine-controller-manager`, no benefit in abbreviating

Generally, an upgrade is also performed through a reconciliation of the `Shoot` resource, i.e., the same concepts as for [shoot updates](#updates) apply.
If an end-user triggers an upgrade (e.g., by changing the Kubernetes version) after a new Gardener version was deployed but before the shoot was reconciled again, then this upgrade might incorporate the changes delivered with this new Gardener version.

`UpdateStrategy` field under shoot worker enables the end user to choose between different behaviour of machine-controller-manager (abbrev.: MCM; the component instrumenting this rolling update) during the upgrade process. Currently gardener support three update strategies:
* `AutoRollingUpdate`
* `AutoInPlaceUpdate`
* `ManualInPlaceUpdate`

### In-Place vs. Rolling Updates

> In case of in-place update worker nodes are updated without the need for replacing the VMs with the new ones. This means that the shoot worker nodes remain untouched. There is some downtime expected as the node needs to be drained and then workload will be scheduled again once the node is updated. If the Kubernetes patch version is changed, then the upgrade happens in-place. This means that the shoot worker nodes remain untouched and only the kubelet process restarts with the new Kubernetes version binary. The same applies for configuration changes of the kubelet.

Reviewer 2: > If the Kubernetes patch version is changed, then the upgrade happens in-place.

This clashes with the newly introduced `In-Place` update. Maybe call it something else.

Reviewer 2: > In case of in-place update worker nodes are updated without the need for replacing the VMs with the new ones.

Call them machines instead of VMs.

> In case of rolling update, upgrade is done in a "rolling update" fashion, similar to how pods in Kubernetes are updated (when backed by a `Deployment`).The worker nodes will be terminated one after another and replaced by new machines.The existing workload is gracefully drained and evicted from the old worker nodes to new worker nodes, respecting the configured `PodDisruptionBudget`s (see [Specifying a Disruption Budget for your Application](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/configure-pdb/)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In case of rolling update, upgrade is done in a "rolling update" fashion, similar to how pods in Kubernetes are updated (when backed by a `Deployment`). The worker nodes will be terminated one after another and replaced by new machines. The existing workload is gracefully drained and evicted from the old worker nodes to new worker nodes, respecting the configured `PodDisruptionBudget`s (see [Specifying a Disruption Budget for your Application](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/configure-pdb/)).
```

### AutoRollingUpdate

> When auto rollling update strategy is selected, upgrade is done in a "rolling update" fashion. Machine controller manager terminates the worker nodes one after the other and replaces it with new machines. This is the default update strategy. In order to create workers with `AutoRollingUpdate` either skip setting the `workers.updateStrategy` field (in this case the field will be defualted to `AutoInPlaceUpdate`) or set the field explicitly to `AutoInPlaceUpdate` for each workers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When auto rolling update strategy is selected, upgrade is done in a "rolling update" fashion. `machine-controller-manager` terminates the worker nodes one after the other and replaces them with new machines. This is the default update strategy. In order to create workers with `AutoRollingUpdate`, either skip setting the `workers.updateStrategy` field (in this case, the field will be defaulted to `AutoRollingUpdate`) or set the field explicitly for each worker.
```
The machines are not always replaced one after the other. It depends on the `MaxSurge` and `MaxUnavailable` fields

> When auto rollling update strategy is selected, upgrade is done in a "rolling update" fashion. Machine controller manager terminates the worker nodes one after the other and replaces it with new machines. This is the default update strategy. In order to create workers with `AutoRollingUpdate` either skip setting the `workers.updateStrategy` field (in this case the field will be defualted to `AutoInPlaceUpdate`) or set the field explicitly to `AutoInPlaceUpdate` for each workers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When auto rolling update strategy is selected, upgrade is done in a "rolling update" fashion. Machine controller manager terminates the worker nodes one after the other and replaces it with new machines. This is the default update strategy. In order to create workers with `AutoRollingUpdate` either skip setting the `workers.updateStrategy` field (in this case the field will be defaulted to `AutoInPlaceUpdate`) or set the field explicitly to `AutoInPlaceUpdate` for each workers.
```

Generally, an upgrade is also performed through a reconciliation of the `Shoot` resource, i.e., the same concepts as for [shoot updates](#updates) apply.
If an end-user triggers an upgrade (e.g., by changing the Kubernetes version) after a new Gardener version was deployed but before the shoot was reconciled again, then this upgrade might incorporate the changes delivered with this new Gardener version.

> `UpdateStrategy` field under shoot worker enables the end user to choose between different behaviour of machine-controller-manager (abbrev.: MCM; the component instrumenting this rolling update) during the upgrade process. Currently gardener support three update strategies:

Reviewer 4: Put the correct path here.
```suggestion
`UpdateStrategy` field under shoot worker `.spec.provider.workers[].updateStrategy` enables the end user to choose between different behaviour of machine-controller-manager (abbrev.: MCM; the component instrumenting this rolling update) during the upgrade process. Currently gardener support three update strategies:
```

> `UpdateStrategy` field under shoot worker enables the end user to choose between different behaviour of machine-controller-manager (abbrev.: MCM; the component instrumenting this rolling update) during the upgrade process. Currently gardener support three update strategies:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`UpdateStrategy` field under shoot worker enables the end user to choose between different behaviour of machine-controller-manager (abbrev.: MCM; the component instrumenting this update) during the upgrade process. Currently gardener support three update strategies:
```

* `AutoRollingUpdate`
* `AutoInPlaceUpdate`
* `ManualInPlaceUpdate`

> ### In-Place vs. Rolling Updates

Reviewer 4: The flow look hard to read, may be put sub heading or something else.

- During an in-place update, worker nodes are updated without replacing the underlying machines.
- The shoot worker nodes remain intact and are not recreated.

> - Some downtime is expected as the node needs to be drained, and workloads are rescheduled once the update is complete.

Reviewer 4: Write the drain part here also same as  rolling update.

- In certain scenarios, updates can be performed without draining the node:
  - When the Kubernetes patch version is updated, the upgrade is executed without draining the node. In this case, the shoot worker nodes remain unchanged, and only the `kubelet` process is restarted with the updated Kubernetes version binary.

>   - Similarly, configuration changes to the `kubelet` are applied without draining the node.

Reviewer 4: I don't think this line is true - see [here](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/a7d4bc2bde28e5ccc69ca5bc1af01e75c2d04ea2/extensions/pkg/controller/worker/machines.go#L173-L206).

- In case of rolling update, upgrade is done in a "rolling update" fashion, similar to how pods in Kubernetes are updated (when backed by a `Deployment`).
- The worker nodes will be terminated one after another and replaced by new machines.
- The existing workload is gracefully drained and evicted from the old worker nodes to new worker nodes, respecting the configured `PodDisruptionBudget`s (see [Specifying a Disruption Budget for your Application](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/configure-pdb/)).

### AutoRollingUpdate

> When the auto rolling update strategy is selected, the upgrade is performed in a "rolling update" manner. The machine-controller-manager sequentially terminates the worker nodes and replaces them with new machines. This is the default update strategy. To create workers with `AutoRollingUpdate`, either omit the `workers.updateStrategy` field (it will default to `AutoInPlaceUpdate`) or explicitly set the field to `AutoInPlaceUpdate` for each worker.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When the auto rolling update strategy is selected, the upgrade is performed in a "rolling update" manner. The machine-controller-manager sequentially terminates the worker nodes and replaces them with new nodes. This is the default update strategy. To create workers with `AutoRollingUpdate`, either omit the `workers.updateStrategy` field (it will default to `AutoRollingUpdate `) or explicitly set the field to `AutoRollingUpdate ` for each worker.
```

The `UpdateStrategy` field in the Shoot specification (`.spec.provider.workers[].updateStrategy`) gives users the flexibility to define how the `machine-controller-manager` handles worker pool updates during the upgrade process. Currently gardener support three update strategies:
* `AutoRollingUpdate`
* `AutoInPlaceUpdate`
* `ManualInPlaceUpdate`

> ⚠️ The above strategies generally require draining the node when changes are made to the `Shoot` specification. The specific changes that trigger this behavior will be discussed in later sections.
For all other spec changes like Kubernetes patch version update, the upgrade is executed without draining the node and the shoot worker nodes remain unchanged. In case of Kubernetes patch version, only the `kubelet` process is restarted with the updated Kubernetes version binary.

### Rolling Updates

The upgrade is performed in a "rolling update" manner, during which nodes in the worker pool are replaced. Similar to how pods in Kubernetes are updated when backed by a `Deployment`.

> Worker nodes are terminated one after another and replaced by new machines.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Worker nodes are terminated one after another and replaced by new nodes.
```

The existing workload is gracefully drained and evicted from the old worker nodes to new worker nodes, respecting the configured `PodDisruptionBudget`s (see [Specifying a Disruption Budget for your Application](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/configure-pdb/)).

#### Automatic Rolling Updates

When the auto rolling update strategy is selected, the update process is fully orchestrated by the Gardener and the machine-controller-manager. The machine-controller-manager sequentially terminates the worker nodes and replaces them with new nodes.
>ℹ️  This is the `default` update strategy.

> To create workers with `AutoRollingUpdate`, either omit the `workers.updateStrategy` field (it will default to `AutoRollingUpdate`) or explicitly set the field to `AutoRollingUpdate` for each worker.

Reviewer 4: `workers.updateStrategy` is not a correct field.

```yaml
spec:
  provider:
    workers:
      - name: cpu-worker
        maxSurge: 0
        maxUnavailable: 2

>         updateStrategy: AutoRollingUpdate

Reviewer 4: Similar changes for missing alignment in other examples.
```suggestion
spec:
  provider:
    workers:
    - name: cpu-worker
      maxSurge: 0
      maxUnavailable: 2
      updateStrategy: AutoRollingUpdate
```

In particular, if the feature gate `NewWorkerPoolHash` is enabled and a worker pool uses the new hash, then the `providerConfig` as a whole is not included. Instead only fields selected by the provider extension are considered.

### In-Place Updates

For scenarios where users want to retain the current nodes and avoid deletion during updates, Gardener provides the option of `in-place` updates. The upgrade is performed without replacing the underlying machines. Although there is an exception where new nodes are created with the updated configuration and old ones are terminated. One such exception is discussed in [Automatic inplace update](#automatic-in-place-updates) section.

The existing workload is gracefully drained and evicted from the worker nodes, respecting the configured `PodDisruptionBudget`s (see [Specifying a Disruption Budget for your Application](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/configure-pdb/)).

> ℹ️ Currently, `in-place` updates are controlled by the `InPlaceNodeUpdates` feature gate in the `gardener-apiserver`.

> For in-place updates, the first requirement is that the operating system must support them. For a specific machine image version, the configuration for in-place updates must be defined in the `CloudProfile` under spec.machineImages[].inPlaceUpdates:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For in-place updates, the first requirement is that the operating system must support them. For a specific machine image version, the configuration for in-place updates must be defined in the `CloudProfile` under `spec.machineImages[].versions[].inPlaceUpdates`:
```

- The `inPlaceUpdates.supported` field must be set to `true`.
- The `inPlaceUpdates.minVersionForUpdate` field specifies the minimum version from which an in-place update to the target machine image version can be performed.

```yaml
machineImages:
- name: gardenlinux
  versions:
  - version: 1632.0.0
    inPlaceUpdates:
      supported: true
      minVersionForUpdate: 1630.0.0
```

The `inPlaceUpdates` field in the Shoot status provides details about in-place updates for the Shoot workers. It includes the `pendingWorkerUpdates` field, which lists the worker pools that are awaiting in-place updates.

#### Customize In-Place Update Behaviour of Shoot Worker Nodes

> In addition to customisable fields mentioned in [](#customize-rolling-update-behaviour-of-shoot-worker-nodes) section, you can configure the following fields in `.spec.provider.worker[].machineControllerManager`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In addition to customisable fields mentioned in the [above](#customize-rolling-update-behaviour-of-shoot-worker-nodes) section, you can also configure the following fields in `.spec.provider.worker[].machineControllerManager`:
```

* `MachineInPlaceUpdateTimeout`:  Timeout (in duration) after which an in-place update is declared as failed.
* `DisableHealthTimeout`: A boolean value that, when set to `true`, ignores the health timeout. As a result, machines are never marked as failed, and unhealthy machines are not deleted. The default value is `true` for in-place updates.

#### In-Place Update Triggers

> An in-place update of the shoot worker nodes is triggered for rolling update triggers listed under [Rolling Update Triggers](#rolling-update-triggers) except the following:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An in-place update of the shoot worker nodes is triggered for rolling update triggers listed under [Rolling Update Triggers](#rolling-update-triggers) except for the following:
```

If an in-place update fails and nodes are left in a problematic state, user intervention is required to manually fix the nodes. In cases where a subsequent update is necessary to resolve the issue, users can update the worker pool after adding the force update annotation `gardener.cloud/operation=force-in-place-update` on the Shoot. Refer to [Force-update a worker pool with InPlace update strategy](shoot_operations.md#force-update-a-worker-pool-with-inplace-update-strategy) for more details.

> ⚠️ Changing the update strategy from `AutoRollingUpdate` to `AutoInPlaceUpdate`/`ManualInPlaceUpdate` (and vice versa) is not allowed. However, switching between `AutoInPlaceUpdate` and `ManualInPlaceUpdate` is permitted.

#### Automatic In-Place Updates

In case of AutoInPlaceUpdate update strategy, the update process is fully orchestrated by Gardener and the machine-controller-manager. No user intervention is required.
Set `.spec.provider.workers[].updateStrategy` field in the `Shoot` spec to `AutoInPlaceUpdate`.

```yaml
spec:
  provider:
    workers:
      - name: cpu-worker
        maxSurge: 0
        maxUnavailable: 2
        updateStrategy: AutoInPlaceUpdate
```

> During the automatic in-place updates, `machine-controller-manager` can create new nodes when `max-surge` value is set to value `>0`. In such cases new nodes are created with the updated configuration and the old ones are terminated.

Reviewer 4: please put more details here that only n number of new nodes will get created, which is maxSurge and then all other nodes get inplace updated.

Generally, the provider extension controllers might have additional constraints for changes leading to rolling updates, so please consult the respective documentation as well.
In particular, if the feature gate `NewWorkerPoolHash` is enabled and a worker pool uses the new hash, then the `providerConfig` as a whole is not included. Instead only fields selected by the provider extension are considered.

> ### InPlace updates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### In-Place Updates
```

- The `inPlaceUpdates.minVersionForUpdate` field specifies the minimum version from which an in-place update to the target machine image version can be performed.

```yaml
machineImages:
- name: gardenlinux
  versions:
  - version: 1632.0.0
    inPlaceUpdates:
      supported: true
      minVersionForUpdate: 1630.0.0
```

The `inPlaceUpdates` field in the Shoot status provides details about in-place updates for the Shoot workers. It includes the `pendingWorkerUpdates` field, which lists the worker pools that are awaiting in-place updates.

#### Customize In-Place Update Behaviour of Shoot Worker Nodes

In addition to customisable fields mentioned in [](#customize-rolling-update-behaviour-of-shoot-worker-nodes) section, you can configure the following fields in `.spec.provider.worker[].machineControllerManager`:

* `MachineInPlaceUpdateTimeout`:  Timeout (in duration) after which an in-place update is declared as failed.
* `DisableHealthTimeout`: A boolean value that, when set to `true`, ignores the health timeout. As a result, machines are never marked as failed, and unhealthy machines are not deleted. The default value is `true` for in-place updates.

> #### InPlace Update Triggers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### In-Place Update Triggers
```

An in-place update of the shoot worker nodes is triggered for rolling update triggers listed under [Rolling Update Triggers](#rolling-update-triggers) except the following:
* `.spec.provider.workers[].machine.image.name`
* `.spec.provider.workers[].machine.type`
* `.spec.provider.workers[].volume.type`
* `.spec.provider.workers[].volume.size`
* `.spec.provider.workers[].cri.name`

> * `.spec.systemComponents.nodeLocalDNS.enabled`

Reviewer 2: Also mention that changing these fields while the in-place update strategies are configured is not allowed.

#### Validations for In-Place update

When a worker pool is undergoing an in-place update, applying subsequent updates to the same worker pool is restricted.
If an in-place update fails and nodes are left in a problematic state, user intervention is required to manually fix the nodes. In cases where a subsequent update is necessary to resolve the issue, users can update the worker pool after adding the force update annotation `gardener.cloud/operation=force-in-place-update` on the Shoot.

Without this annotation, subsequent updates to the same worker pool are denied. Refer to [Force-update a worker pool with InPlace update strategy](shoot_operations.md#force-update-a-worker-pool-with-inplace-update-strategy) for more details.

> ⚠️ Changing the update strategy from `AutoRollingUpdate` to `AutoInPlaceUpdate`/`ManualInPlaceUpdate` (and vice versa) is not allowed. However, switching between `AutoInPlaceUpdate` and `ManualInPlaceUpdate` is permitted.

> #### AutoInPlaceUpdate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Automatic In-Place Updates
```

In case of AutoInPlaceUpdate update strategy, the update process is fully orchestrated by Gardener and the machine-controller-manager. No user intervention is required.  Set `.spec.provider.workers[].updateStrategy` field in the `Shoot` spec to `AutoInPlaceUpdate`.

The `inPlaceUpdates.pendingWorkerUpdates.autoInPlaceUpdate` field in the Shoot status lists the names of worker pools that are pending updates with the `AutoInPlaceUpdate` strategy.

```yaml
spec:
  provider:
    workers:
      - name: cpu-worker
        maxSurge: 0
        maxUnavailable: 2
        updateStrategy: AutoInPlaceUpdate

> ```

Reviewer 2: Move this near to the part where you mention setting the shoot spec

> #### ManualInPlaceUpdate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Manual In-Place Updates
```

The `ManualInPlaceUpdate` strategy allows users to control and orchestrate the update process manually. Set `.spec.provider.workers[].updateStrategy` field in the `Shoot` spec to `ManualInPlaceUpdate`.

Once machine-controller-manager labels nodes with `node.machine.sapcloud.io/candidate-for-update`, user can select the candidate nodes for update by labeling them with `node.machine.sapcloud.io/selected-for-update=true`: 
```
kubectl label node <node-name> node.machine.sapcloud.io/selected-for-update=true
```

The `ManualInPlaceWorkersUpdated` [constraint](../shoot/shoot_status.md/#constraints) in the shoot status indicates that at least one worker pool with the `ManualInPlaceUpdate` strategy is pending an update. Shoot reconciliation will still succeed even if there are worker pools pending updates.

The `inPlaceUpdates.pendingWorkerUpdates.manualInPlaceUpdate` field in the `Shoot` status lists the names of worker pools that are pending updates with the this strategy.

```yaml
spec:
  provider:
    workers:
      - name: cpu-worker
        maxSurge: 0
        maxUnavailable: 2
        updateStrategy: ManualInPlaceUpdate

> ```

Reviewer 2: same here

```yaml
machineImages:
- name: gardenlinux
  updateStrategy: minor
  versions:
  - architectures:
    - amd64
    - arm64
    classification: preview
    cri:
    - containerRuntimes:
      - type: gvisor
      name: containerd
    version: 1632.0.0
    inPlaceUpdates:
      supported: true
      minVersionForUpdate: 1630.0.0
```

#### InPlace Update Triggers

An in-place update of the shoot worker nodes is triggered for rolling update triggers listed under [Rolling Update Triggers](#rolling-update-triggers) except the following:
* `.spec.provider.workers[].machine.image.name`
* `.spec.provider.workers[].machine.type`
* `.spec.provider.workers[].volume.type`
* `.spec.provider.workers[].volume.size`
* `.spec.provider.workers[].cri.name`
* `.spec.systemComponents.nodeLocalDNS.enabled`

#### Validations for In-Place update

> Validations are in place to restrict any further updates when the current update is going on.
> For the cases where in-place update fails and the nodes are in problematic state, it requires user intervention to fix the node manually . After the fix user should be able to restart the update by the force update annotation `gardener.cloud/operation=force-in-place-update`. Without this annotation, any subsequent updates to the same worker pool are denied, refer [Force-update a worker pool with InPlace update strategy](shoot_operations.md#force-update-a-worker-pool-with-inplace-update-strategy) on how to force an update for worker pools.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a worker pool is undergoing an in-place update, applying subsequent updates to the same worker pool is restricted.
For the cases where in-place update fails and the nodes are in the failed state, it might require an operator intervention to fix the node. To update a failed worker pool to a new version, let's say, a new machine image patch version,  they can use the force in-place update annotation, refer [Force-update a worker pool with InPlace update strategy](shoot_operations.md#force-update-a-worker-pool-with-inplace-update-strategy) on how to force an update for worker pools.
```

> At present it is not allowed to change the update strategy of a worker from AutoRollingUpdate to Auto/Manual in-place update. Same applies for the other way round as well that is once the update strategy is selected as Auto/Manual in-place update , it cannot be changed to AutoRolling update. Though switching between Auto and Manual auto in-place update is allowed. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is currently not allowed to change the update strategy of a worker from `AutoRollingUpdate` to `AutoInPlaceUpdate/ManualInPlaceUpdate` and vice versa. Switching between `AutoInPlaceUpdate` and `ManualInPlaceUpdate` is allowed. 
```

#### AutoInPlaceUpdate

> In case of AutoInPlaceUpdate update strategy, the update process is fully orchestrated by the MCM and gardener without user intervention. Use `updateStrategy` as `AutoInPlaceUpdate` in worker for auto in-place update.

Reviewer 2: use `machine-controller-manager` everywhere instead of MCM

Reviewer 2: > Use `updateStrategy` as `AutoInPlaceUpdate` in worker for auto in-place update.

The update strategy should be set to `AutoInPlaceUpdate` in the worker spec.

        maximum: 5
        maxSurge: 0
        maxUnavailable: 2
        updateStrategy: AutoInPlaceUpdate
        machine:
          type: m5.large
          image:
            name: <some-image-name>
            version: <some-image-version>
          architecture: <some-cpu-architecture>
        providerConfig: <some-machine-image-specific-configuration>
```

#### Customize Auto In-Place Update Behaviour of Shoot Worker Nodes

The `.spec.provider.workers[]` list exposes two fields that you might configure based on your workload's needs: `maxSurge` and `maxUnavailable`.
The same concepts [like in Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/#rolling-update-deployment) apply.
Additionally, you might customize how the MCM is behaving. You can configure the following fields in `.spec.provider.worker[].machineControllerManager`:

* `MachineInPlaceUpdateTimeout`:  Timeout (in duration) after which an in-place update is declared as failed.
* `DisableHealthTimeout`: Boolean value if set to true, health timeout will be ignored, leading to machine never being declared as failed (default: `true` for in-place updates). 

#### ManualInPlaceUpdate

> ManualInPlaceUpdate update strategy is useful in scenarios where user wants to control and orchestrate the update process. Here user has the option to select the particular node which needs to be updated at a time. In order to update a node, label the node with `node.machine.sapcloud.io/selected-for-update=true`. Once the node is labeled  with `node.machine.sapcloud.io/selected-for-update=true`, MCM will carry out the update process of the selected node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`ManualInPlaceUpdate` update strategy is useful in scenarios where the user wants to control and orchestrate the update process. Here user has the option to select the particular node that needs to be updated at a time. To update a node, they should label the node with `node.machine.sapcloud.io/selected-for-update=true`.
```

> `ManualInPlaceWorkersUpdated` [constraint](../shoot/shoot_status.md/#constraints) in shoot status indicates that at least one worker pool with the update strategy `ManualInPlaceUpdate` is pending an update. Shoot reconciliation succeeds even with worker pools pending for an update.

Reviewer 2: Talk about the shoot status field as well

Generally, the provider extension controllers might have additional constraints for changes leading to rolling updates, so please consult the respective documentation as well.
In particular, if the feature gate `NewWorkerPoolHash` is enabled and a worker pool uses the new hash, then the `providerConfig` as a whole is not included. Instead only fields selected by the provider extension are considered.

### InPlace updates

For scenarios where users want to retain the current nodes and avoid their deletion during updates, Gardener provides the option of `in-place` updates. Currently, `in-place` updates are controlled by the `InPlaceNodeUpdates` feature gate.

> The machine image version in the `cloudprofile` includes the `inPlaceUpdates` field, which defines the configuration for in-place updates. For an operating system to support in-place updates:

Reviewer 4: Something like
```suggestion
For in-place updates, the first requirement is that the operating system must support them. For a specific machine image version, the configuration for in-place updates must be defined in the `CloudProfile` under spec.machineImages[].inPlaceUpdates:
```

```yaml
machineImages:
- name: gardenlinux
  updateStrategy: minor
  versions:
  - architectures:
    - amd64
    - arm64
    classification: preview
    cri:
    - containerRuntimes:
      - type: gvisor
      name: containerd
    version: 1632.0.0
    inPlaceUpdates:
      supported: true
      minVersionForUpdate: 1630.0.0
```

The `inPlaceUpdates` field in the Shoot status provides details about in-place updates for the Shoot workers. It includes the `pendingWorkerUpdates` field, which lists the worker pools that are awaiting in-place updates.

#### InPlace Update Triggers

An in-place update of the shoot worker nodes is triggered for rolling update triggers listed under [Rolling Update Triggers](#rolling-update-triggers) except the following:
* `.spec.provider.workers[].machine.image.name`
* `.spec.provider.workers[].machine.type`
* `.spec.provider.workers[].volume.type`
* `.spec.provider.workers[].volume.size`
* `.spec.provider.workers[].cri.name`
* `.spec.systemComponents.nodeLocalDNS.enabled`

#### Validations for In-Place update

When a worker pool is undergoing an in-place update, applying subsequent updates to the same worker pool is restricted.

> If an in-place update fails and nodes are left in a problematic state, user intervention is required to manually fix the nodes. After resolving the issue, users can restart the update by adding the force update annotation `gardener.cloud/operation=force-in-place-update`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If an in-place update fails and nodes are left in a problematic state, user intervention is required to manually fix the nodes. In cases where a subsequent update is necessary to resolve the issue, users can update the worker pool after adding the force update annotation `gardener.cloud/operation=force-in-place-update` on the Shoot.
```

Without this annotation, subsequent updates to the same worker pool are denied. Refer to [Force-update a worker pool with InPlace update strategy](shoot_operations.md#force-update-a-worker-pool-with-inplace-update-strategy) for more details.

> > ⚠️ Changing the update strategy from `AutoRollingUpdate` to `AutoInPlaceUpdate` or `ManualInPlaceUpdate` (and vice versa) is not allowed. However, switching between `AutoInPlaceUpdate` and `ManualInPlaceUpdate` is permitted.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> ⚠️ Changing the update strategy from `AutoRollingUpdate` to `AutoInPlaceUpdate`/`ManualInPlaceUpdate` (and vice versa) is not allowed. However, switching between `AutoInPlaceUpdate` and `ManualInPlaceUpdate` is permitted.
```

#### AutoInPlaceUpdate

> In case of AutoInPlaceUpdate update strategy, the update process is fully orchestrated by Gardener and the machine-controller-manager. No user intervention is required.The update strategy should be set to `AutoInPlaceUpdate` in the worker spec.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In case of AutoInPlaceUpdate update strategy, the update process is fully orchestrated by Gardener and the machine-controller-manager. No user intervention is required. The update strategy should be set to `AutoInPlaceUpdate` in the Shoot spec under `.spec.provider.workers[].updateStrategy.
```

The `inPlaceUpdates.pendingWorkerUpdates.autoInPlaceUpdate` field in the Shoot status lists the names of worker pools that are pending updates with the `AutoInPlaceUpdate` strategy.

```yaml
spec:
  provider:
    type: <some-provider-name>
    workers:
      - name: cpu-worker
        minimum: 5
        maximum: 5
        maxSurge: 0
        maxUnavailable: 2
        updateStrategy: AutoInPlaceUpdate
        machine:
          type: m5.large
          image:
            name: <some-image-name>
            version: <some-image-version>
          architecture: <some-cpu-architecture>
        providerConfig: <some-machine-image-specific-configuration>
```

#### Customize Auto In-Place Update Behaviour of Shoot Worker Nodes

The `.spec.provider.workers[]` list exposes two fields that you might configure based on your workload's needs: `maxSurge` and `maxUnavailable`.
The same concepts [like in Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/#rolling-update-deployment) apply.

> Additionally, you might customize how the machine-controller-manager is behaving. You can configure the following fields in `.spec.provider.worker[].machineControllerManager`:

Reviewer 4: Refer here the list of other MCM configuration which is listed for AutoRollingUpdate.

* `MachineInPlaceUpdateTimeout`:  Timeout (in duration) after which an in-place update is declared as failed.

> * `DisableHealthTimeout`: Boolean value if set to true, health timeout will be ignored, leading to machine never being declared as failed (default: `true` for in-place updates). 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `DisableHealthTimeout`: Boolean value if set to true, health timeout will be ignored. As a result, the machine is never marked as failed, and unhealthy machines are not deleted (default: `true` for in-place updates). 
```

#### ManualInPlaceUpdate

> The `ManualInPlaceUpdate` strategy allows users to control and orchestrate the update process manually. Users can select specific nodes for updates by labeling them with:

Reviewer 4: Mention user should only select nodes which have candidate for update lable.

`node.machine.sapcloud.io/selected-for-update=true.` Once labeled, the machine-controller-manager updates the selected node.

> The update strategy should be set to `ManualInPlaceUpdate` in the worker spec.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The update strategy should be set to `ManualInPlaceUpdate` in the Shoot spec.
```
